###### Rainforests

# Deathwatch for the Amazon 

> Print edition | Leaders | Aug 1st 2019 

ALTHOUGH ITS **cradle** is the ***sparsely*** wooded savannah, **humankind has long looked to forests for** food, fuel, **timber** and **sublime** inspiration. Still ***a livelihood for*** 1.5bn people, forests maintain local and regional ecosystems and, for the other 6.2bn, provide ***a—fragile and creaking—buffer against climate change***. ***Now droughts, wildfires and other human-induced changes are compounding the damage from chainsaws.*** In the tropics, which contain half of the world’s forest biomass, ***tree-cover loss has accelerated by*** two-thirds since 2015; if it were a country, the shrinkage would make the tropical rainforest the world’s third-biggest ***carbon-dioxide emitter***, after China and America.

Nowhere are the **stakes** higher than in the Amazon **basin**—and not just because it contains 40% of Earth’s rainforests and **harbours** 10-15% of the world’s terrestrial species. South America’s natural wonder may be **perilously close** to the **tipping-point** beyond which its gradual transformation into something closer to **steppe** cannot be stopped or reversed, even if people **lay down their axes**. Brazil’s president, Jair Bolsonaro, is **hastening** the process—***in the name***, he claims, ***of*** development. The ecological collapse his policies may precipitate would be felt most acutely within his country’s borders, which encircle 80% of the basin—but would go far beyond them, too. It must be **averted**.

Humans have been **chipping away** at the Amazon rainforest since they settled there well over ten millennia ago. Since the 1970s they have done so on an industrial scale. In the past 50 years Brazil has ***relinquished*** 17% of the forest’s original extent, more than the area of France, ***to*** road- and dam-building, **logging**, mining, soyabean farming and **cattle ranching**. ***After a seven-year government effort to slow the destruction***, it ***picked up*** in 2013 because of weakened enforcement and an **amnesty** for past deforestation. Recession and political crisis further ***pared back*** the government’s ability to enforce the rules. Now Mr Bolsonaro has **gleefully** ***taken a buzz saw to*** them. Although congress and the courts have blocked some of his efforts to **strip** parts of the Amazon of their protected status, he has made it clear that rule-breakers have nothing to fear, despite the fact that he was elected to restore law and order. Because 70-80% of logging in the Amazon is illegal, the destruction has ***soared to*** record levels. Since he took office in January, trees have been disappearing at a rate of over two Manhattans a week. 

The Amazon is unusual in that it recycles much of its own water. As the forest **shrivels**, less recycling ***takes place***. At a certain threshold, that causes more of the forest to **wither** so that, over a matter of decades, the process feeds on itself. Climate change is bringing the threshold closer every year as the forest heats up. Mr Bolsonaro is ***pushing it towards the edge***. **Pessimists** fear that the cycle of **runaway degradation** may ***kick in*** when another 3-8% of the forest ***vanishes***—which, under Mr Bolsonaro, could happen soon. ***There are hints*** the pessimists may be correct (see Briefing). In the past 15 years the Amazon has ***suffered*** three severe droughts. Fires are ***on the rise***. 

Brazil’s president ***dismisses*** such findings, as he does science more broadly. He accuses outsiders of **hypocrisy**—did rich countries not fell their own forests?—and, sometimes, of using environmental **dogma** as a **pretext** to keep Brazil poor. “The Amazon is ours,” the president thundered recently. What happens in the Brazilian Amazon, he thinks, is Brazil’s business. 

Except it isn’t. A “**dieback**” would directly hurt the seven other countries with which Brazil shares the river basin. It would reduce the moisture channelled along the Andes as far south as Buenos Aires. If Brazil were **damming** a real river, not choking off an **aerial** one, downstream nations could consider it an act of war. As the vast Amazonian store of carbon burned and **rotted**, the world could heat up by as much as 0.1°C by 2100—not a lot, you may think, but the ***preferred target of*** the Paris climate agreement allows further warming of only 0.5°C or so. 

Mr Bolsonaro’s other arguments are also **flawed**. Yes, the rich world has **razed** its forests. Brazil should not copy its mistakes, but learn from them instead as, say, France has, by reforesting while it still can. Paranoia about Western **scheming** is just that. The knowledge economy values the genetic information **sequestered** in the forest more highly than land or dead trees. Even if it did not, ***deforestation is not a necessary price of development.*** Brazil’s output of soyabeans and beef rose between 2004 and 2012, when forest-clearing slowed by 80%. In fact, aside from the Amazon itself, Brazilian agriculture may be deforestation’s ***biggest victim***. The drought of 2015 caused maize farmers in the central Brazilian state of Mato Grosso to lose a third of their harvest. 

For all these reasons, ***the world ought to make clear to Mr Bolsonaro that*** it will not tolerate his vandalism. Food companies, pressed by consumers, should **spurn** soyabeans and beef produced on illegally logged Amazonian land, as they did in the mid-2000s. Brazil’s trading partners should make deals **contingent** on its good behaviour. The agreement reached in June by the EU and Mercosur, a South American trading bloc of which Brazil is the biggest member, already includes provisions to protect the rainforest. It is overwhelmingly in the parties’ interest to ***enforce*** them. So too for China, which is anxious about global warming and needs Brazilian agriculture to feed its livestock. Rich signatories of the Paris agreement, who pledged to pay developing ones to plant carbon-consuming trees, ought to do so. Deforestation ***accounts for*** 8% of global greenhouse-gas emissions but attracts only 3% of the aid **earmarked** for ***combating climate change***. 

***If there is a green shoot in Mr Bolsonaro’s scorched-earth tactics towards the rainforest, it is that*** they have made the Amazon’s **plight** harder to ignore—and not just for outsiders. Brazil’s agriculture minister urged Mr Bolsonaro to stay in the Paris agreement. Unchecked ***deforestation could end up*** hurting Brazilian farmers if it leads to foreign boycotts of Brazilian farm goods. Ordinary Brazilians should press their president to reverse course. They have been blessed with a unique planetary **patrimony**, ***whose value is intrinsic and life-sustaining as much as it is commercial.*** ***Letting it perish would be a needless catastrophe.*** ■ 